0.12.0 (2024-08-29)
===================

Breaking Changes
----------------

- Change connection URL used for generating HWM names of S3 and Samba sources:
    * ``smb://host:port`` -> ``smb://host:port/share``
    * ``s3://host:port`` -> ``s3://host:port/bucket`` (:github:pull:`304`)

- Update DB connectors/drivers to latest versions:
    * Clickhouse ``0.6.0-patch5`` → ``0.6.4``
    * MongoDB ``10.3.0`` → ``10.4.0``
    * MSSQL ``12.6.2`` → ``12.8.1``
    * MySQL ``8.4.0`` → ``9.0.0``
    * Oracle ``23.4.0.24.05`` → ``23.5.0.24.07``
    * Postgres ``42.7.3`` → ``42.7.4``

- Update ``Excel`` package from ``0.20.3`` to ``0.20.4``, to include Spark 3.5.1 support. (:github:pull:`306`)

Features
--------

- Add support for specifying file formats (``ORC``, ``Parquet``, ``CSV``, etc.) in ``HiveWriteOptions.format`` (:github:pull:`292`):

  .. code:: python

    Hive.WriteOptions(format=ORC(compression="snappy"))

- Collect Spark execution metrics in following methods, and log then in DEBUG mode:
    * ``DBWriter.run()``
    * ``FileDFWriter.run()``
    * ``Hive.sql()``
    * ``Hive.execute()``

  This is implemented using custom ``SparkListener`` which wraps the entire method call, and
  then report collected metrics. But these metrics sometimes may be missing due to Spark architecture,
  so they are not reliable source of information. That's why logs are printed only in DEBUG mode, and
  are not returned as method call result. (:github:pull:`303`)

- Generate default ``jobDescription`` based on currently executed method. Examples:
    * ``DBWriter() -> Postgres[host:5432/database]``
    * ``MongoDB[localhost:27017/admin] -> DBReader.run()``
    * ``Hive[cluster].execute()``

  If user already set custom ``jobDescription``, it will left intact. (:github:pull:`304`)

- Add log.info about JDBC dialect usage (:github:pull:`305`):

  .. code:: text

    |MySQL| Detected dialect: 'org.apache.spark.sql.jdbc.MySQLDialect'

- Log estimated size of in-memory dataframe created by ``JDBC.fetch`` and ``JDBC.execute`` methods. (:github:pull:`303`)


Bug Fixes
---------

- Fix passing ``Greenplum(extra={"options": ...})`` during read/write operations. (:github:pull:`308`)
- Do not raise exception if yield-based hook whas something past (and only one) ``yield``.
