0.7.0 (2023-05-15)
--------------------------

🎉 onETL is now open source 🎉
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

That was long road, but we finally did it!

Breaking Changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Changed installation method.

  **TL;DR What should I change to restore previous behavior**

  Simple way:

  +-------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | onETL < 0.7.0     | onETL >= 0.7.0                    |
  +===================+===================================+
  | pip install onetl | pip install onetl[files,kerberos] |
  +-------------------+-----------------------------------+

  Right way - enumerate connectors should be installed:

  .. code-block:: bash

      pip install onetl[hdfs,ftp,kerberos]  # except DB connections

  **Details**

  In onetl<0.7 the package installation looks like:

  .. code-block:: bash
      :caption: before

      pip install onetl

  But this includes all dependencies for all connectors, even if user does not use them.
  This caused some issues, for example user had to install Kerberos libraries to be able to install onETL, even if user uses only S3 (without Kerberos support).

  Since 0.7.0 installation process was changed:

  .. code-block:: bash
      :caption: after

      pip install onetl  # minimal installation, only onETL core
      # there is no extras for DB connections because they are using Java packages which are installed in runtime

      pip install onetl[ftp,ftps,hdfs,sftp,s3,webdav]  # install dependencies for specified file connections
      pip install onetl[files]  # install dependencies for all file connections

      pip install onetl[kerberos]  # Kerberos auth support
      pip install onetl[spark]  # install PySpark to use DB connections

      pip install onetl[spark,kerberos,files]  # all file connections + Kerberos + PySpark
      pip install onetl[all]  # alias for previous case

  There are corresponding documentation items for each extras.

  Also onETL checks that some requirements are missing, and raises exception with recommendation how to install them:

  .. code-block:: text
      :caption: exception while import Clickhouse connection

      Cannot import module "pyspark".

      Since onETL v0.7.0 you should install package as follows:
          pip install onetl[spark]

      or inject PySpark to sys.path in some other way BEFORE creating MongoDB instance.

  .. code-block:: text
      :caption: exception while import FTP connection

      Cannot import module "ftputil".

      Since onETL v0.7.0 you should install package as follows:
          pip install onetl[ftp]

      or
          pip install onetl[files]

* Added new ``cluster`` argument to ``Hive`` and ``HDFS`` connections.

  ``Hive`` qualified name (used in HWM) contains cluster name. But in onETL<0.7.0 cluster name had hard coded value ``rnd-dwh`` which was not OK for some users.

  ``HDFS`` connection qualified name contains host (active namenode of Hadoop cluster), but its value can change over time, leading to creating of new HWM.

  Since onETL 0.7.0 both ``Hive`` and ``HDFS`` connections have ``cluster`` attribute which can be set to a specific cluster name.
  For ``Hive`` it is mandatory, for ``HDFS`` it can be omitted (using host as a fallback).

  But passing cluster name every time could lead to errors.

  Now ``Hive`` and ``HDFS`` have nested class named ``slots`` with methods:

  * ``normalize_cluster_name``
  * ``get_known_clusters``
  * ``get_current_cluster``
  * ``normalize_namenode_host`` (only ``HDFS``)
  * ``get_cluster_namenodes`` (only ``HDFS``)
  * ``get_webhdfs_port`` (only ``HDFS``)
  * ``is_namenode_active`` (only ``HDFS``)

  And new method ``HDFS.get_current`` / ``Hive.get_current``.

  Developers can implement hooks validating user input or substituting values for automatic cluster detection.
  This should improve user experience while using these connectors.

  See slots documentation.

* Update JDBC connection drivers.

  * Greenplum ``2.1.3`` → ``2.1.4``.
  * MSSQL ``10.2.1.jre8`` → ``12.2.0.jre8``. Minimal supported version of MSSQL is now 2014 instead 2021.
  * MySQL ``8.0.30`` → ``8.0.33``:
  * * Package was renamed ``mysql:mysql-connector-java`` → ``com.mysql:mysql-connector-j``.
  * * Driver class was renamed ``com.mysql.jdbc.Driver`` → ``com.mysql.cj.jdbc.Driver``.
  * Oracle ``21.6.0.0.1`` → ``23.2.0.0``.
  * Postgres ``42.4.0`` → ``42.6.0``.
  * Teradata ``17.20.00.08`` → ``17.20.00.15``:
  * * Package was renamed ``com.teradata.jdbc:terajdbc4`` → ``com.teradata.jdbc:terajdbc``.
  * * Teradata driver is now published to Maven.

  See :github:pull:`31`.

Features
^^^^^^^^

* Added MongoDB connection.

  Using official `MongoDB connector for Spark v10 <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/spark-connector/current/>`_. Only Spark 3.2+ is supported.

  There are some differences between MongoDB and other database sources:

  * Instead of ``mongodb.sql`` method there is ``mongodb.pipeline``.
  * No methods ``mongodb.fetch`` and ``mongodb.execute``.
  * ``DBReader.hint`` and ``DBReader.where`` have different types than in SQL databases:

  .. code-block:: python

      where = {
          "col1": {
              "$eq": 10,
          },
      }

      hint = {
          "col1": 1,
      }

  * Because MongoDB does not have schemas of collections, but Spark cannot create dataframe with dynamic schema, new option ``DBReader.df_schema`` was introduced.
    It is mandatory for MongoDB, but optional for other sources.
  * Currently DBReader cannot be used with MongoDB and hwm expression, e.g. ``hwm_column=("mycolumn", {"$cast": {"col1": "date"}})``

  Because there are no tables in MongoDB, some options were renamed in core classes:

  * ``DBReader(table=...)`` → ``DBReader(source=...)``
  * ``DBWriter(table=...)`` → ``DBWriter(target=...)``

  Old names can be used too, they are not deprecated (:github:pull:`30`).

* Added option for disabling some plugins during import.

  Previously if some plugin were failing during the import, the only way to import onETL would be to disable all plugins
  using environment variable.

  Now there are several variables with different behavior:

  * ``ONETL_PLUGINS_ENABLED=false`` - disable all plugins autoimport. Previously it was named ``ONETL_ENABLE_PLUGINS``.
  * ``ONETL_PLUGINS_BLACKLIST=plugin-name,another-plugin`` - set list of plugins which should NOT be imported automatically.
  * ``ONETL_PLUGINS_WHITELIST=plugin-name,another-plugin`` - set list of plugins which should ONLY be imported automatically.

  Also we improved exception message with recommendation how to disable a failing plugin:

  .. code-block:: text
      :caption: exception message example

      Error while importing plugin 'mtspark' from package 'mtspark' v4.0.0.

      Statement:
          import mtspark.onetl

      Check if plugin is compatible with current onETL version 0.7.0.

      You can disable loading this plugin by setting environment variable:
          ONETL_PLUGINS_BLACKLIST='mtspark,failing-plugin'

      You can also define a whitelist of packages which can be loaded by onETL:
          ONETL_PLUGINS_WHITELIST='not-failing-plugin1,not-failing-plugin2'

      Please take into account that plugin name may differ from package or module name.
      See package metadata for more details

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added compatibility with Python 3.11 and PySpark 3.4.0.

  File connections were OK, but ``jdbc.fetch`` and ``jdbc.execute`` were failing. Fixed in :github:pull:`28`.

* Added check for missing Java packages.

  Previously if DB connection tried to use some Java class which were not loaded into Spark version, it raised an exception
  with long Java stacktrace. Most users failed to interpret this trace.

  Now onETL shows the following error message:

  .. code-block:: text
      :caption: exception message example

      |Spark| Cannot import Java class 'com.mongodb.spark.sql.connector.MongoTableProvider'.

      It looks like you've created Spark session without this option:
          SparkSession.builder.config("spark.jars.packages", MongoDB.package_spark_3_2)

      Please call `spark.stop()`, restart the interpreter,
      and then create new SparkSession with proper options.

* Documentation improvements.

  * Changed documentation site theme - using `furo <https://github.com/pradyunsg/furo>`_
    instead of default `ReadTheDocs <https://github.com/readthedocs/sphinx_rtd_theme>`_.

    New theme supports wide screens and dark mode.
    See :github:pull:`10`.

  * Now each connection class have compatibility table for Spark + Java + Python.
  * Added global compatibility table for Spark + Java + Python + Scala.

Bug Fixes
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Fixed several SFTP issues.

  * If SSH config file ``~/.ssh/config`` contains some options not recognized by Paramiko (unknown syntax, unknown option name),
    previous versions were raising exception until fixing or removing this file. Since 0.7.0 exception is replaced with warning.

  * If user passed ``host_key_check=False`` but server changed SSH keys, previous versions raised exception until new key is accepted.
    Since 0.7.0 exception is replaced with warning if option value is ``False``.

    Fixed in :github:pull:`19`.

* Fixed several S3 issues.

  There was a bug in S3 connection which prevented handling files in the root of a bucket - they were invisible for the connector. Fixed in :github:pull:`29`.
